User Guide Getting Started Deployment Options initial draft (#6944)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/user-guide/administration/installation/index.md

# Installation

Whether you are getting started for the first time, looking to build a local lab or ready to build a production environment, there are a variety of options to find the right fit for your needs with using Nautobot. 

## Deployment Options

**Are you checking out Nautobot for the first time and don't want to install anything quite yet?** 

> You should consider playing around in the [Nautobot Always-On Sandbox Environments](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/sandbox-environments/). There is sample data already prepopulated, no installation required, and several Nautobot Apps are pre-installed, with sample data. 

Reviewer: Perhaps?

```suggestion
You can explore the [Nautobot Always-On Sandbox Environments](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/sandbox-environments/). There is sample data already prepopulated, no installation required, and several Nautobot Apps are pre-installed, with sample data. 
```

Author: much simpler and same meaning, works for me. I will add to my updated commit

# Installation

> Whether you are getting started for the first time, looking to build a local lab or ready to build a production environment, there are a variety of options to find the right fit for your needs with using Nautobot. 

Reviewer: markdownlint fix:

```suggestion
Whether you are getting started for the first time, looking to build a local lab or ready to build a production environment, there are a variety of options to find the right fit for your needs with using Nautobot.
```

!!! tip "Checking out Nautobot for the first time? Not ready to install anything yet?"
    You can explore the [Nautobot Always-On Sandbox Environments](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/sandbox-environments/). There is sample data already prepopulated, no installation required, and several Nautobot Apps are pre-installed, with sample data.

## Deployment Options

=== "Bare metal / Virtual Machine"

    You can [install Nautobot](install_system.md) onto a [RHEL (Red Hat Enterprise Linux)](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/linux-platforms/enterprise-linux) or [Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com/) virtual machine. 
    
    Nautobot was designed to be a cross-platform application that can run on nearly any system that is able to run the required dependencies. *Only the operating system platforms listed below are officially supported at this time*.

    * Red Hat flavors of Linux including CentOS 8.2+ and Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) 8.2+ are supported.

>     * Debian/Ubuntu flavors of Linux including Ubuntu 20.04+ and Debian 11+ are supported.

Reviewer 2: we should update this from 20.04+ to at least 22.04 and evaluate all of these.

Reviewer: We haven't dropped support for 20.04 as far as I know.

Author: Maybe we change the phrasing from `support` to recommended?

Author: should we keep this as is, but remove the Centos per Josh's recommendation?

Author: @glennmatthews @itdependsnetworks Any feedback regarding these statements or should I resolve this comment?
Thanks!

    * Performance is generally higher without the overhead of virtualization
    * Full control over hardware and software allows for greater customization and security practices

    ### Bare metal / Virtual Machine Cons

    * Maintenance and high availability is more difficult than Docker or Cloud options
    * Preparing server for production grade security and scaling requires additional effort 

=== "Docker Compose"

    Nautobot can be deployed via Docker using [Nautobot Docker images](../guides/docker.md) that are available either from:

    * [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/networktocode/nautobot)
    * [GitHub Container Registry](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/pkgs/container/nautobot) 

    For local testing and lab work you can use the Nautobot [Docker Compose](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot-docker-compose) project which leverages the container images above. 

    For more information about the Docker tags, Docker configurations, or using container images for your own development environment, see [Nautobot in Docker](../guides/docker.md).

    ### Docker Compose Pros

    * Quick to deploy for single node lab work and testing

>     * For those looking for a multi-container single-node install for Nautobot often coupled with backup & HA capabilities from their hypervisor manager

Author: Thanks for the feedback, definitely could use some editing. 

What about replacing those bullets with:

```
* Quick and simple setup for single-node lab environments and testing
* Lightweight alternative for those who don't need full Kubernetes orchestration
```

>     * For those looking for a multi-container single-node install for Nautobot often coupled with backup & HA capabilities from their hypervisor manager

Reviewer: I like it.

    * Limited scaling if on single host 

=== "Kubernetes Helm Charts"

    You can [install Nautobot via Helm Charts](https://docs.nautobot.com/projects/helm-charts/en/stable/) for Kubernetes documentation. 

    If you are looking for an example of what that process looks like in a development environment using `minikube`, you can check out the three part blog series covering deploying Nautobot to Kubernetes:
        
    * [Part 1](https://networktocode.com/blog/deploying-nautobot-to-kubernetes-01/)
    * [Part 2](https://networktocode.com/blog/deploying-nautobot-to-kubernetes-02/)
    * [Part 3](https://networktocode.com/blog/deploying-nautobot-to-kubernetes-03/)

    ### Helm Charts Pros

    * Helm charts serves as a package manager for Kubernetes, streamlining the deployment of complex applications within Kubernetes clusters
    * Using Kubernetes features, you can manage large-scale deployments efficiently and ensure high-availability for production grade systems

    ### Helm Charts Cons

    * Requires knowledge of Kubernetes and has a steeper learning curve for setting up
    * Kubernetes clusters can use a lot of resources and monitoring effort

=== "Nautobot Cloud"

>     [Nautobot Cloud](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/nautobot-cloud/) is a commercial Software as a Service (SaaS) offering from Network to Code. It offers self-service and turnkey deployment for Nautobot removing the need for infrastructure setup and maintenance for the application. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    [Nautobot Cloud](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/nautobot-cloud/) is a commercial Software as a Service (SaaS) offering from Network to Code. It is the _**easy**_ button for Nautobot. It offers self-service and turnkey deployment for Nautobot removing the need for infrastructure setup and maintenance including one-click upgrades, cones, backups and restores, and a marketplace to streamline Nautobot App installations.
```

>     Nautobot Cloud also streamlines the deployment and management of several other commonly used automation tools:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>     [Nautobot Cloud](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/nautobot-cloud/) is a commercial Software as a Service (SaaS) offering from Network to Code. It is the _**easy**_ button for Nautobot. It offers self-service and turnkey deployment for Nautobot removing the need for infrastructure setup and maintenance including one-click upgrades, cones, backups and restores, and a marketplace to streamline Nautobot App installations.

Reviewer 4: Should this be `clones` not `cones`?

>     * [Ansible AWX](https://github.com/ansible/awx)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>     * Commonly used network telemetry stack (Grafana / Prometheus / Telegraf)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>     * Linux automation utilities

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

    ### Nautobot Cloud Pros

    * Click to deploy multiple instances of Nautobot with no effort
    * Enterprise grade dashboards to see trends of Nautobot data across all Nautobot instances
    * Click to install apps from Nautobot Cloud Marketplace
    * Cloud-based database snapshots

    ### Nautobot Cloud Cons

>     * Requires paid account with Network to Code

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * You’ll have to find something else to do with all that freed-up time now that you’re not maintaining on-prem applications and infrastructure.
```

>     * Once-click deployments of Ansible AWX too

Reviewer 4: "One" not "Once"

# Installation

Whether you are getting started for the first time, looking to build a local lab or ready to build a production environment, there are a variety of options to find the right fit for your needs with using Nautobot. 

## Deployment Options

**Are you checking out Nautobot for the first time and don't want to install anything quite yet?** 

> You can explore the [Nautobot Always-On Sandbox Environments](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/sandbox-environments/). There is sample data already prepopulated, no installation required, and several Nautobot Apps are pre-installed, with sample data. 

Reviewer: Possibly move this above the `Deployment Options` subheader, and change it to a `!!! tip` admonition?

```
!!! tip "Checking out Nautobot for the first time? Not ready to install anything yet?"
    You can explore the [Nautobot Always-On Sandbox Environments](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/sandbox-environments/). There is sample data already prepopulated, no installation required, and several Nautobot Apps are pre-installed, with sample data.
```

=== "Bare metal / Virtual Machine"

    You can [install Nautobot](install_system.md) onto a [RHEL (Red Hat Enterprise Linux)](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/linux-platforms/enterprise-linux) or [Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com/) virtual machine. 
    
    ??? info "Supported Platforms"

        Nautobot was designed to be a cross-platform application that can run on nearly any system that is able to run the required dependencies. *Only the operating system platforms listed below are officially supported at this time*.

>         * Red Hat flavors of Linux including CentOS 8.2+ and Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) 8.2+ are supported.

Reviewer 5: If we are doing something here, should we evaluate removing CentOS and put Fedora in here? I'm not seeing much CentOS referenced any more. There are a few other flavors. Not a show stopper, but if we are modifying this, perhaps some look.

Reviewer 5: @jabelk I'm good by RHEL derivatives or something of that nature.

        * Debian/Ubuntu flavors of Linux including Ubuntu 20.04+ and Debian 11+ are supported.

        Nautobot *should* work on any POSIX-compliant system including practically any flavor of Linux, BSD, or even macOS, but those are not *officially* supported at this time.

>     <h3>Bare metal / Virtual Machine Pros</h3>

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    ### Bare metal / Virtual Machine Pros
```

>     * Familiar deployment option for many administrators
>     * Performance is generally higher without the overhead of virtualization
>     * Full control over hardware and software allows for greater customization and security practices

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Familiar deployment option for many administrators  
    * Performance is generally higher without the overhead of virtualization  
    * Full control over hardware and software allows for greater customization and security practices  
```

Adds spaces so that this is a new line (from the render it is not in a new line)

>     <h3>Bare metal / Virtual Machine Cons</h3>

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    ### Bare metal / Virtual Machine Cons
```

>     * Maintenance and high availability is more difficult than Docker or Cloud options
>     * Preparing server for production grade security and scaling requires additional effort 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Maintenance and high availability is more difficult than Docker or Cloud options 
    * Preparing server for production grade security and scaling requires additional effort  
```

=== "Docker Compose"

    Nautobot can be deployed via Docker using [Nautobot Docker images](../guides/docker.md) that are available either from:

>     * [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/networktocode/nautobot)
>     * [GitHub Container Registry](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/pkgs/container/nautobot) 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/networktocode/nautobot)  
    * [GitHub Container Registry](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/pkgs/container/nautobot)   
```

    For local testing and lab work you can use the Nautobot [Docker Compose](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot-docker-compose) project which leverages the container images above. 

    For more information about the Docker tags, Docker configurations, or using container images for your own development environment, see [Nautobot in Docker](../guides/docker.md).

>     <h3>Docker Compose Pros</h3>

Reviewer 5: Same

>     * Quick to deploy for single node lab work and testing
>     * For those looking for a multi-container single-node install for Nautobot often coupled with backup & HA capabilities from their hypervisor manager

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Quick to deploy for single node lab work and testing  
    * For those looking for a multi-container single-node install for Nautobot often coupled with backup & HA capabilities from their hypervisor manager  
```

    <h3>Docker Compose Cons</h3>

>     * Docker compose on its own is missing advanced features like automated rollbacks, self-healing applications, and load balancing 
>     * Limited scaling if on single host 
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Docker compose on its own is missing advanced features like automated rollbacks, self-healing applications, and load balancing   
    * Limited scaling if on single host   
```

        
    * [Part 1](https://networktocode.com/blog/deploying-nautobot-to-kubernetes-01/)
    * [Part 2](https://networktocode.com/blog/deploying-nautobot-to-kubernetes-02/)
    * [Part 3](https://networktocode.com/blog/deploying-nautobot-to-kubernetes-03/)

    <h3>Helm Charts Pros</h3>

    * Helm charts serves as a package manager for Kubernetes, streamlining the deployment of complex applications within Kubernetes clusters
    * Using Kubernetes features, you can manage large-scale deployments efficiently and ensure high-availability for production grade systems

    <h3>Helm Charts Cons</h3>

    * Requires knowledge of Kubernetes and has a steeper learning curve for setting up
    * Kubernetes clusters can use a lot of resources and monitoring effort

=== "Nautobot Cloud"

    [Nautobot Cloud](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/nautobot-cloud/) is a commercial Software as a Service (SaaS) offering from Network to Code. It offers self-service and turnkey deployment for Nautobot removing the need for infrastructure setup and maintenance for the application. 

    Nautobot Cloud also streamlines the deployment and management of several other commonly used automation tools:

>     * [Ansible AWX](https://github.com/ansible/awx)
>     * [Batfish](https://github.com/batfish/batfish)
>     * Commonly used network telemetry stack (Grafana / Prometheus / Telegraf)
>     * Linux automation utilities

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * [Ansible AWX](https://github.com/ansible/awx)  
    * [Batfish](https://github.com/batfish/batfish)  
    * Commonly used network telemetry stack (Grafana / Prometheus / Telegraf)  
    * Linux automation utilities  
```

Reviewer 2: @jvanderaa I think the suggestion should include a new line before.

Author: Agreed, just added a newline, just like the list for Heml

>     <h3>Nautobot Cloud Pros</h3>

Author: good point, shifting the h3 for these to `###` so they can show up on breadcrumbs

    Nautobot *should* work on any POSIX-compliant system including practically any flavor of Linux, BSD, or even macOS, but those are not *officially* supported at this time.

#### Bare metal / Virtual Machine Pros

- Familiar deployment option for many administrators
- Performance is generally higher without the overhead of virtualization
- Full control over hardware and software allows for greater customization and security practices

#### Bare metal / Virtual Machine Cons

- Maintenance and high availability is more difficult than Docker or Cloud options
- Preparing server for production grade security and scaling requires additional effort 

### Docker Compose

Nautobot can be deployed via Docker using [Nautobot Docker images](../guides/docker.md) that are available either:

> * [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/networktocode/nautobot)

Reviewer: FYI - I think our markdownlint toolchain doesn't like mixing `- list` with `* list` style in the same file.

Author: ok I will swap out hyphens for stars to be consistent, good catch

* [GitHub Container Registry](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/pkgs/container/nautobot) 

For local testing and lab work you can use the Nautobot [Docker Compose](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot-docker-compose) project which leverages the container images above. 

For more information about the Docker tags, Docker configurations, or using container images for your own development environment, see [Nautobot in Docker](../guides/docker.md).

#### Docker Compose Pros

- Quick to deploy for single node lab work and testing
- For those looking for a multi-container single-node install for Nautobot often coupled with backup & HA capabilities from their hypervisor manager

#### Docker Compose Cons

> - Does not deploy NGINX, SSL, or any Nautobot plugins by default

Reviewer: I don't *think* this entirely accurate, though I see a similar message in the nautobot-docker-compose README.md - the baseline Docker images do include SSL with a self-signed certificate by default

The nautobot-docker-compose repo also provides documentation for adding SSL certificates and/or adding Nautobot ~plugins~ *Apps* to the image.

Author: Gotcha, I will just take that line out then. Thanks!

- Using Kubernetes features, you can manage large-scale deployments efficiently and ensure high-availability for production grade systems

#### Helm Charts Cons

- Requires knowledge of Kubernetes and has a steeper learning curve for setting up
- Kubernetes clusters can use a lot of resources and monitoring effort

### Nautobot Cloud

[Nautobot Cloud](https://networktocode.com/nautobot/nautobot-cloud/) is a commercial Software as a Service (SaaS) offering from Network to Code. It offers self-service and turnkey deployment for Nautobot removing the need for infrastructure setup and maintenance for the application. 

Nautobot Cloud also streamlines the deployment and management of several other commonly used automation tools:
- [Ansible AWX](https://github.com/ansible/awx)
- [Batfish](https://github.com/batfish/batfish)
- Commonly used network telemetry stack (Grafana / Prometheus / Telegraf)
- Linux automation utilities

#### Nautobot Cloud Pros

- Click to deploy multiple instances of Nautobot with no effort
- Enterprise grade dashboards to see trends of Nautobot data across all Nautobot instances
- Click to install apps from Nautobot Cloud Marketplace

> - Cloud-based Database snapshots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Cloud-based database snapshots
```

Author: Makes sense, will update in my other commits edit

#### Nautobot Cloud Cons

> - Requires existing account with Network to Code

Reviewer: Perhaps `paid account` rather than `existing account`? Not sure.

Author: Agreed, I wasn't sure what to put on the cons side for cloud offering. I will add paid account for now, and hopefully get some other feedback from the team if we want to keep this or add something else.

Reviewer 6: I'd go with "Requires an active contract with Network to Code"

Reviewer 3: Just saw this now, I had more fun with it =)
